# Descriptive Statistics II

Last lecture, we learned of two statistics:

* The mean \\(\bar x\\), which is a measure of center.
* The (sample) standard deviation \\(s\\), which is a measure of
  dispersion.

Both of these statistics are not "robust" in that their values is highly
sensitive to the existance of extreme values ("outliers") in the data
set.

Alternative statistics that *are* robust include the median (a measure
of center) and the interquartile range (a measure of dispersion).

### Preparing the data

If one is calculating the aforementioned robust statistics by hand, it
is useful to first order the data set in either ascending or descending
order.

For example, consider the following data set of 20 numbers:

```
12  22  38  43  45  46  51  51  61  67  74  75  78  81  86  91  96  98 116  190
```

Notice how this data set is ordered from least to greatest.

### Median

The **median** of the data set is defined so that half of the data is less than
or equal to the median. The other half of the data is greater than or equal to
the median. So the median can be thought of as a number that divides the data
"in half".

For data sets with an odd number of entries, calculating the median is
straightforward. The median is merely the "middle number" when the data is
ordered (ascending or descending). For example, the median of the first 5
prime numbers (2, 3, 5, 7, 11) is 5.

However, things are a little more complicated when the data set has an even
number of entries. Here, the data set has two "middle numbers". The conventional
practice (but the only one) is to average these two values (add and divide by
2).

For example, enumerate the aforementioned data set:

```
1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20
12  22  38  43  45  46  51  51  61  67  74  75  78  81  86  91  96  98  116 190
```

The two middle numbers is the 10th entry (67) and the 11th entry (74). The
median is therefore calculated as

\\[\begin{aligned}
\text{median}
&= \frac{67+74}{2} \\\\
&= 70.5
\end{aligned} \\]

The median is a robust statistic. It is clear that 190 is an "extreme value"
(and potential outlier). If this number were to increase dramatically (say, to,
190,000), the median will not change. 

In general, including a few outliers to a data set only results in small changes
(if any) to the median. Therefore, the median is robust. 

### Quartiles
The median is sometimes called the **second quartile** \\(Q_2\\).

Each data set has three **quartiles**: \\(Q_1\\) (the first quartile), 
\\(Q_2\\) (the second quartile, the median), and \\(Q_3\\) (the third quartile).
These three numbers partition a data set into four equal parts. One-fourth
of the data set should be less than or equal to  \\(Q_1\\). Another one-fourth
of the data-set should be greater than \\(Q_3\\).

\\(Q_1\\) is the median of the "lower half" of the data set. If the data set
has an odd number of entries, include the median. In our example, the lower
half of the data set:

```
12  22  38  43  45  46  51  51  61  67
```

The two middle numbers are 45 and 46. So \\(Q_1 = 45.5\\).

Similarly, \\(Q_2\\) is the "greater half" of the data set. If the data set is
odd, include the median. In our example, the upper half is:

```
74  75  78  81  86  91  96  98  116 190
```

The two middle numbers are 86 and 91. Thus, \\(Q_3 =88.5\\).

**[[ Note:** There are alternative ways to calculate the first and third
quartiles. If the data set was processed with R, for example, it would report
the first quartile as being 45.75 and the third quantile as being 87.25. For the
purposes of grading, please use methods provided in the textbook. **]]**

The **five-number summary** consists of five statistics: the minimum, the first
quartile, the second quartile, the third quartile, and the maximum. It has to
be written in that order. For our dataset, the five-number summary is as
follows:

```
12 45.5 70.5 88.5 190
```

The five-number summary contains a lot of information about a data set in only
five numbers.

### IQR and potential outliers

The **interquartile range** is defined as \\(\text{IQR} = Q_3 - Q_1\\). In
our example, the interquartile range is \\(88.5 - 45.5 = 43\\).

Like the standard deviation, the interquartile range is a measure of dispersion.
Highly disperse data sets have a large IQR. Tight data sets have a low IQR.
But like the median, the IQR is robust. It is insensitive to the inclusion of
outliers.

A popular method of identifying outliers is called **Tukey's fences**. One
first defines and "upper limit" and "lower limit" as follows:

\\[\begin{aligned}
\text{Upper Limit} &= Q_2 + 1.5 \times \text{IQR} \\\\
\text{Lower Limit} &= Q_2 - 1.5 \times \text{IQR}
\end{aligned}\\]

Any value in the data set greater than the upper limit is a potential outlier.
Any value in the data set less than  the lower limit is also a potential
outlier. In our example, the only potential outlier is 190 (upper limit = 135).

**[[ Note:** There are many alternative methods to identify potential outliers.
Tukey's fences is desirable because the math is easy. **]]**

### Which statistics should you use?

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Statistic</td>
    <td>Measures</td>
    <td>Robust?</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean</td>
    <td>Center</td>
    <td>No</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Standard deviation</td>
    <td>Dispersion</td>
    <td>No</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Median</td>
    <td>Center</td>
    <td>Yes</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Interquartile range (IQR)</td>
    <td>Dispersion</td>
    <td>Yes</td>
  </tr>
</table>

For exploratory data analysis, the median and interquartile range are desirable
for their robustness and their ability to locate potential outliers. Producing
a five-number summary should be one of the first things you should do in
analyzing a numerical data set.

However, the mathematical properties of the mean and sample deviation are
numerous. So numerous, in fact, that the rest of Statistics I and all of
Statistics II rarely refer back to the median and IQR.
