# Test I

Test I is scheduled for October 10th, 2017 during regular class hours.
This test accounts for one-fourth of the cumulative grade.

## What will be on the test?

The test covers material in chapters 1 through 5 of the course text.
Exceptions include sections 1.4, 3.3, 4.7, 4.8, and 5.4.

Most problems will be similar to problems assigned for homework
(including MyStatLab assignments). Some problems may reflect examples
discussed in lecture. Other problems may be open-ended. Such problems
test your insight of fundamental concepts (e.g. "explain the
difference between inferential and descriptive statistics").

## How should I prepare for the test?

Some tips:

* Review the homework problems. Your homework was your "test review".
* Review the textbook. Make concise notes. You should be able to fit
  all essential information into three sheets of notebook paper.
* If you need extra practice, look to the end of each chapter for the
  "Review Problems".
* Form a study group.
* Get help at the Academic Support Center. This is located at
  the basement of the Somerset building.
* If you have a disability for which you need accommodations, please
  seek the Office of Disability Services immediately.
* Feel free to email me with any questions.

## What should I do on test day?

* Come to the college early. Late arrivals will not be given extra time.
  No-shows will receive a grade of "zero".
* Arrive for the  section that you are actually registered for.
* Bring pencils, a scientific or basic calculator (**not a graphing
  calculator**), and a photo ID.
* Use the restroom prior to taking the test. Should you leave the
  classroom for any reason, you may not recontinue your test. Your test
  will be graded "as is".
* **Do not cheat.** If you are caught doing so, you will automatically
  fail the course.
